chore: update restart docs for protocol upgrade (#581)
vegaprotocol/documentation: docs/node-operators/how-to/upgrade-network.md

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

> The Protocol Upgrade feature allows the Node Operators synchronously update nodes to the next version of the Vega Protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protocol upgrades allow consensus node operators to synchronously update nodes to the next version of the Vega Protocol.
```

> The Protocol Upgrade feature allows the Node Operators synchronously update nodes to the next version of the Vega Protocol.

Reviewer: should this not be "asynchronously"?

Reviewer 2: Actually they I think in this case it is meant `synchronously`, because they upgrade will take place synchronously but automatically.

Reviewer: So maybe "automatically" instead of synchronously?

> The Protocol Upgrade feature allows the Node Operators synchronously update nodes to the next version of the Vega Protocol.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Protocol Upgrade feature allows the Node Operators to synchronously update nodes to the next version of the Vega Protocol.
```

The Protocol Upgrade involves three main parts: 
1. Submit a transaction to initiate the upgrade on a specific block (validators only)
2. Prepare a Node for Protocol Upgrade
3. Execute an upgrade at the agreed block

Smooth execution of the Protocol Upgrade is critical to the Vega Network, and any downtime or disruption must be minimised. Using Vega Visor is recommended and will automatically prepare and execute a protocol upgrade. Alternatively, the Node Operator can manually perform an Upgrade at an agreed block height for an agreed Vega software version.

> To help with Protocol Upgrades, the data node provides useful information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To help with protocol upgrades, the following endpoints can provide relevant information:
```

* to view submitted proposals use **[protocol upgrade proposals](../../api/rest/data-v2/trading-data-service-list-protocol-upgrade-proposals.api.mdx) endpoint**,
* to view if the network is ready for upgrade use **[protocol upgrade status](../../api/rest/data-v2/trading-data-service-get-protocol-upgrade-status.api.mdx) endpoint**.

> ## 1. Submit a transaction to initiate the upgrade on a specific block (validators only)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. Submit a transaction to initiate the upgrade on a specific block

This step can only be done by consensus validators.
```
is it true that it's only consensus, not standby? I've added it in but would like confirmation.

### 1.1 Select upgrade block height and new Vega version

This step is async, and it involves all validators. First, all validators have to agree on the following:

* The block height to upgrade at
* The Vega version to upgrade to

The block height must be in the future. When choosing the `upgrade block`, you should give all validators enough time to vote on the upgrade and then prepare the config for a new network.

:::info Example

> Selecting the `current block` + 1000 - should give 1000 blocks * 0.9 seconds (or whatever the average block time is) = 900 secs. That means there will be about 15 minutes for all validators to vote and prepare, which might not be enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Selecting the `current block` + 1000 - should allow for 1000 blocks * 0.9 seconds (or whatever the average block time is) = 900 secs. That means there will be about 15 minutes for all validators to vote and prepare, which might not be enough.
```

To check the block time on the network, visit the `http://<YOUR-NODE-IP>:3003/statistics` endpoint. Currently, the block time is around ~0.9 seconds, though it may be higher around ~1.5 seconds when there are not many transactions or some validators are missing.
:::

### 1.2 Vote for an upgrade

All validators must execute this step, regardless of whether or not they are running Vega Visor.

> After all the validators agree on the `upgrade block height` and the `desired version` of the Vega, vote on an upgrade. To vote, use the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After all the validators agree on the `upgrade block height` and the `desired version` of Vega, vote on an upgrade. To vote, use the following command, as an example. Be sure to confirm the release tag and height before you continue:
```

vega protocol_upgrade_proposal \
	--home /home/vega/vega_home \
	--passphrase-file /home/vega/vega_home/nodewallet_passphrase.txt \
	--vega-release-tag v0.71.0 \
	--height 1034000 \
	--output "json"
```

> The Protocol Upgrade proposal is approved if more than 2/3 of consensus validators have voted on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol upgrade proposal is approved if more than 2/3 of consensus validators have voted on it.
```

> Anyone can observe how the voting goes using data node **[protocol upgrade proposals](../../api/rest/data-v2/trading-data-service-list-protocol-upgrade-proposals.api.mdx) endpoint**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anyone can observe how the voting goes using the **[protocol upgrade proposals](../../api/rest/data-v2/trading-data-service-list-protocol-upgrade-proposals.api.mdx) endpoint**.
```

> # 2. Prepare a Node for Protocol Upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2. Prepare node for protocol upgrade
```

> All Node Operators must perform these steps, regardless of whether or not they are using Vega Visor.
> 
> ## 2.1 Prepare network configuration (all)
> 
> The Node Operator needs to check if the config needs upgrading. That includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All node operators must perform these steps, regardless of whether or not they are using Vega Visor.

### 2.1 Prepare network configuration (all)

Each node operator needs to check if their config needs updating. That includes:
```

1. The Vega core configuration (`<VEGA-NETWORK-HOME>/config/node/config.toml`)- only if there were changes
2. The Tendermint configuration (`<TENDERMINT-HOME>/config/config.toml`)  - only if there were changes
3. The data node configuration (`<VEGA-NETWORK-HOME>/config/data-node/config.toml`) - only if there were changes and you are running data-node.

Track changes in the configuration between versions in the upgrading readme: [Configuration changes ↗](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/UPGRADING.md#configuration-changes)

> ## 2.2 Prepare Visor configuration (visor only)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.2 Prepare Visor configuration, if using Visor
```

> Skip:
> - if you are not using Vega Visor (go to the next point 2.3),
> - if your node has Internet access (Vega Visor will do this for you),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can skip this step if:
* You are not using Vega Visor (go to step 2.3)
* Your node has internet access (Vega Visor will do this step)
```

> On the other hand, you need to perform this step if your node does not have Internat access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your node does **not** have internet access and you are using Visor, do the following:
```

1. Create the new version folder in the `<VEGA-VISOR-HOME>`, e.g., for version `v0.71.0`, run the following command: `mkdir -p <VEGA-VISOR-HOME>/v0.71.0`.
2. Download the new version of the Vega binary from the [releases page ↗](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/releases)

> 3. Unzip the downloaded binary into the created directory, e.g. `<VEGA-VISOR-HOME>/v0.71.0/vega` binary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Unzip the downloaded binary into the created directory, e.g. `<VEGA-VISOR-HOME>/v0.71.0/vega` binary
```

    socketPath = "<SOCKET-FOLDER-PATH>/vega.sock"
    httpPath = "/rpc"

> # skip below if you don't have data node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# skip the following if you do not run a data node ```

Check the following parameters.

- `name` - This must match the created directory
- `vega.binary.path` - It may be an absolute path or a relative (to config folder) path. Change that path when you have unzipped the new binary into a different folder.
- `--nodewallet-passphrase-file` flag - Check if the path is correct for your node wallet passphrase.
- `vega.rpc.socketPath` - Make sure the path to the Vega Unix sock is correct and matches the one in the Vega config.

> Once you have performed steps `2.1 Prepare network configuration (all)` and `2.2 Prepare Visor configuration (visor only)`, you don't have to do anything else. The visor will automatically restart the node once the `core` and the `data-node` (if you run one) report they are ready for Protocol Upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have performed steps `2.1 Prepare network configuration (all)` and `2.2 Prepare Visor configuration, if using Visor`, you don't have to do anything else. Visor will automatically restart the node once the core and data node (if you run one) report they are ready for the protocol upgrade.
```

> ## 2.3 Prepare for an upgrade without Vega Visor (non visor only)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.3 Prepare for an upgrade if not using Visor
```

> You should perform these steps only if you are NOT running Vega Visor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should perform these steps only if you are NOT running Visor.
```

1. Download the new version of the Vega binary from the [releases page ↗](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/releases)
2. Unzip the downloaded binary into your file system.
3. Update your systemd (or any other process manager) to use the new binary.
4. Reload a systemd service: `systemctl daemon-reload`, or use your own preferred.

> Now you are ready for `Protocol Upgrade`. Please read `3. Execute an upgrade at the agreed block (non visor only)` to know what to do next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you are ready for the protocol upgrade. Move onto the next step,`3. Execute an upgrade at the agreed block (non-Visor only)` for the next steps.
```

> # 3. Execute an upgrade at the agreed block (non visor only)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 3. Execute an upgrade at the agreed block (non-Visor only)
```

> You should perform these steps only if you are NOT running Vega Visor. If you use Vega Visor, it will perform these steps for you automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should perform these steps only if you are NOT running Visor. If you use Visor, it will perform these steps for you automatically.
```

> **Important:** Smooth execution of the Protocol Upgrade is critical to the Vega Network, and any downtime or disruption must be minimised.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Important:** Smooth execution of a protocol upgrade is critical to the Vega network, and any downtime or disruption must be minimised.
```

This is already mentioned above - is it necessary to say it 2x? Are there any tips we can provide for how someone can minimise disruption or execute this smoothly?

> The below steps cover both use cases: `core` only (marked `a`) and `core + data-node` (marked `b`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The below steps cover two use cases: for those running a core node only (marked `a`) and those running a core and data node (marked `b`).
```

> ## 3.1 Wait for the `Protocol Upgrade` block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3.1 Wait for the protocol upgrade block
```

> `(a)`: Monitor `/statistics` until `blockHeight` reaches the `upgrade block` and stops increasing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`(a)`: Monitor the `http://<YOUR-NODE-IP>:3003/statistics` endpoint until `blockHeight` reaches the `upgrade block` and stops increasing
```

> `(b)`: Monitor `/statistics` of data-node REST endpoint, until both: `blockHeight` from the response body and `x-block-height` response header, both hit `upgrade block`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`(b)`: Monitor the `http://<YOUR-NODE-IP>:3003/statistics` for your data node's REST instance, until both `blockHeight` from the response body and `x-block-height` response header, both hit `upgrade block`.
```

> **Important:* both `core` and `data-node` will automatically stop processing blocks at the `Protocol Upgrade` block. Both will process any remaining data and prepare for `Protocol Upgrade` by creating a snapshot and network history segment. Depending on your hardware, it might take a couple of seconds or longer. The `core` and the `data-node` process will not exit. Instead, they both will mark themselves as ready for the upgrade. As a Node Operator, you need to check if `core` is ready for restart for `Protocol Upgrade` (`core` waits for `data-node` before marking itself as ready), then you can safely restart the `core` and `data-node` (if you run one) processes.
> 
> ## 3.2 Verify logs if it is safe to restart services
> 
> `(a)` and `(b)`: In the Vega core logs, you will see the following messages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note 
Both the core and data node will automatically stop processing blocks at the protocol upgrade block. Both will process any remaining data and prepare for the protocol upgrade by creating a snapshot and network history segment. 

Depending on your hardware, it might take 2-3 seconds or longer. The core and data node process will not exit. Instead, they both will mark themselves as ready for the upgrade. As a node operator, you need to check if core is ready to restart for the protocol upgrade. Core waits for data node before marking itself as ready. Then you can safely restart the core and date node (if running) processes.
:::

### 3.2 Verify from logs if it is safe to restart services

`(a)` and `(b)`: In the Vega core logs, you will see the following messages:
```

```
2023-03-02T13:01:04.379+0100	INFO	datanode.service	service/protocol_upgrade.go:36	datanode is ready for protocol upgrade
```

### 4. Restarting nodes (for node operators NOT using Visor)

#### 4a. As a node operator if you are running both a Vega node and a data node:

1. Check the latest data node network-history segment block height (`SEGMENT-BLOCK-HEIGHT`) on data node by running: `vega datanode network-history latest-history-segment —home $DATA_NODE_HOME`
2. Start the data node with the following command: `vega datanode start`

> 3. Once the data node has started, proceed to start the Vega core node on the **same block height as data node** with the following command: `vega node —-home $VEGA-NETWORK-HOME --snapshot.load-from-block-height $SEGMENT-BLOCK-HEIGHT`

Reviewer 4: Hmmm, I am not sure about those steps if you have a new binary(wanted after protocol upgrade) and you start from an earlier block it will panic, 

With protocol upgrade we should just update binary and restart the network when vega & data node are ready- We know this from logs

Reviewer 2: Yeah actually that is true. Hmm. this was for restart when the network fails. Not a smooth protocol upgrade.

Reviewer 2: I will change it

Reviewer 2: @daniel1302 Actually, I think you need to read the previous steps. there or not part of this PR. We do mentioned that validator should watch for the logs: https://github.com/vegaprotocol/documentation/blob/c09d98c7de7e7dc5fe501a9a2583695e2b892da4/docs/node-operators/how-to/upgrade-network.md#check-if-vega-core-is-ready-for-restart

...
```

`(b)`: In the data node logs, you will see the following message:

```
2023-03-02T13:01:04.379+0100	INFO	datanode.service	service/protocol_upgrade.go:36	datanode is ready for protocol upgrade
```

## 3.3 Restart services

`(a)`: Restart your `core` process

> `(b)`: When you run both: `core` and `data-node`, you must stop both first, and then you can start both in any order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`(b)`: When you run both core and data node, you must stop both first, and then you can start both, in any order.
```

> ## 3.4 Automate

Reviewer: Automate what?

Reviewer: Is this actually a follow-on step from 3.3?

> ## 3.4 Automate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3.4 Automate
```

> Vega Visor is designed to perform `Protocol Upgrade` automatically, but you can automate it yourself. The key is to check if `core` is ready for a restart for `Protocol Upgrade`. As described before, it might take some time (seconds) between the node reaching the `Protocol Upgrade` block and marking itself as ready for the restart. That is why you should not rely on block height, e.g. from `/statistics`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
Visor is designed to perform a protocol upgrade automatically, but you can automate it yourself. The key is to check if core is ready for a restart for a protocol upgrade. As described above, it might take several seconds between the node reaches the protocol upgrade block and marks itself as ready to be restarted. Do not solely rely on block height, e.g. from the `/statistics` endpoint.
```

> Instead, you need to query `core` using the Admin json rpc endpoint. This is what Vega Visor is doing. Important Note: We do not have any plans, but this might change, so please watch for changes in the Vega Visor.

Author: ```suggestion
Instead, you need to query `core` using the Admin json rpc endpoint as this is what Vega Visor is doing. Note: This might change in the future, so please keep an eye on the release notes for changes in the Vega Visor.
```

> Instead, you need to query `core` using the Admin json rpc endpoint as this is what Vega Visor is doing. Note: This might change in the future, so please keep an eye on the release notes for changes in the Vega Visor.

Reviewer: Add release notes link for Visor please

In your `core` config (`<VEGA-NETWORK-HOME>/config/node/config.toml`), you will find:
```toml
[Admin]
  [Admin.Server]
    SocketPath = "/path/to/vega.sock"
    HTTPPath = "/my-rpc"
```

> Then you can send request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you can send the following request:
```

```bash

> # Run it from use that has access to /path/to/vega.sock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Run it from a user that has access to /path/to/vega.sock
```

sudo -u vega \
    curl http://localhost/my-rpc \
        --unix-socket /path/to/vega.sock \
         -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        --data '{"jsonrpc": "2.0", "method": "protocolupgrade.UpgradeStatus", "params": [], "id": "id"}'
```

Example response:
```json
{
    "result": {
        "AcceptedReleaseInfo": {
            "VegaReleaseTag":"",
            "UpgradeBlockHeight":0
        },
        "ReadyToUpgrade":false
    },
    "error":null,
    "id":"id"
}
```

> `ReadyToUpgrade` tells you if `core` is ready for shutdown for `Protocol Upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ReadyToUpgrade` tells you if core is ready for a shutdown for a protocol upgrade.
```

> `ReadyToUpgrade` tells you if `core` is ready for shutdown for `Protocol Upgrade.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`ReadyToUpgrade` tells you if `core` is ready for shutdown for `Protocol Upgrade`.
```

> # Benefits of using Visor to coordinate upgrades

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Benefits of using Visor to coordinate upgrades
```
